# Reflection

## Main Message of Module 3

My main takeaway of the final module of the course is that digital work is incredibly diverse but also interconnected, in a sense, which became doubly clear by the use of mind maps to demonstrate trains of thought. The digital work we looked at ranged from digital archeology to gaming to archeogaming to raising the dead with AI that analyzes text. That's quite a wide cross-section! But despite this diversity, they often start and finish in the smae place. 

For instance, using digital tools to listen to data can be interpreted in a multitude of different ways, ranging from using musical sounds to represent data that effectively conveys information -- and sometimes even sounds good or interesting -- in a process known as musification to its cousin, sonification, which makes no attempt of making the end product sound musical but simply presents data in some auditory form. While the difference between pure noise to convey data and an imitation of music to do so are certainly different approaches, they re-converge in their end product of using our sense of hearing to portray and interpret large amounts of data efficiently. I personally really liked the industry "Song of Ottawa" because its creativity of sonifying a physical object isn't something I'd ever even considered as an idea, let alone though was possible. The sheer amount of data that process produced is also insane to me, 6 hours! (Cristina Wood)

## Applying this to My Unessay

Along with re-reading the Jennifer Evans article, the process of sound mapping really impressed upon me the range of what's possible with an auditory experience, which made me consider what limitations I had subconsciously place on myself with my project simply due to muscle memory of conducting research for essays for the past few years, as it's a format I've gotten comfortable with. I guess it took me a bit to realize the implications of the final project being called an Unessay, but I got there in the end. By considering the wider possibilities of what I could do with sound, I also considered the wider possibilities of my actual topic of focus. For essays, keeping a concise subject or focus is key, so I kind of reflexively did the same in the earlier stages of my research for this project, pigeon-holing myself to focus solely on survivors of Residential Schools. However, with the medium here being so very different from a traditional term paper, broadening my focus not only makes for a more compelling project to create, but it also brings far more added value. If this process yielded something an essay could have (just in a different format) what's the point?

## What does it mean to ‘do history’ when the machine is a co-creator of the experience working on its own?

This is especially relevant to my project, as I am not inputting any code into Echoes.xyz to produce the auditory experience. I do belive that it changes the definition of "doing history" a tad, but I don't think that's a bad thing at all. The role of the historian remains a significant one here, especially with a tool like Echoes, where the historian inputs the information quite precisely, including all audio clips and the precise locations where the Echoes are "dropped". I also like the term co-creator in this sense, because it's an accurate one. I could not produce the experience I'm envisioning without a software like Echoes. Not only does it translate all the information I feed it to form a cohesive experience, but it also provides the platform where the public can interact with it. However, the historian retains control of the actual details of the experience, including the overlap of echoes and any linear paths for the listener to follow (or not). As a whole, the research process and history work remains, but the output, presentation, and role of technology differ from traditional history, but at its core, it remains a representation of hisotrical research, so I don't belive it should be viewed differently.
